From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams
>> [music]
>> and this is The Daily.
>> For months, a Hollywood drama has been
unfolding that's fit for the big screen.
>> [music]
>> It's a corporate love triangle with a
cast of characters including a
billionaire scion, a tech [music] giant,
and the president of the United States.
Now that story appears to be coming to a
close.
But with a twist [music] ending.
Today, my colleagues Nicole Sperling,
Lauren Hirsch, and Jonathan Mahler
explain [music]
why the merger between Paramount and
Warner Brothers has left Hollywood in a
state of shock.
And why the deal could [music] reshape
our political and cultural landscape.
It's Wednesday, [music]
March 4th.
Lauren, Nicole, Jonathan, good to have
you here.
Thanks for having us.
>> Good to be here. Happy to be here. So,
we have gathered the three of you here
today because for months now, there has
been this looming question over
Hollywood about who was going to buy
Warner Brothers. And we finally seem to
have our answer. It's going to be
Paramount with the winning bid. Lauren,
you've covered every inch of this
corporate deal making so far. Nicole,
you have been paying close attention to
how Hollywood is reacting to all of
this. And Jonathan,
your extensive reporting on the Murdochs
means that you are pretty well
positioned to comment on what it means
when billionaires come to town. So,
Jonathan, I want to start with you. Can
you explain why this deal matters? I
mean, on the most basic level, this deal
matters a ton because we are talking
about the creation of an enormous media
empire here. We're talking about under
one single roof, Paramount, CBS, HBO,
Warner Brothers, CNN, Nickelodeon, MTV,
and and on and on and on. We are talking
about a a huge media company. And we're
also talking about Larry and David
Ellison who are, you know, new media
power brokers. Larry, of course, was the
founder of Oracle in the '70s and an
original kind of legacy software
company. You know, a billionaire many,
many times over who has in recent years
gotten very close to the president, to
Donald Trump. And his son David, who was
at one point an aspiring actor who then
went on to become a film producer and
financier here and then bought
Paramount. And now with this new deal,
Warner Brothers Discovery, he's going to
become one of the most powerful media
moguls in the world almost overnight.
And so the two of them together are now
emerging as a new kind of father-son
duo. Really, you would have to say kind
of outstripping the influence of Rupert
and Lachlan Murdoch. They are the new
Murdochs, but quite possibly a lot more
powerful.
So, we're going to talk more about the
Ellison's influence and how this deal
positions them. But first, I want to
talk a little bit about how this deal
even came together. Lauren, the last
time you were on the show, you were
talking to us about this deal and it
looked at the time like Netflix was
going to be the winning bidder, right?
And at the time, Paramount was in the
middle of trying to swoop in and outbid
them. So, catch us up on what has
happened since then.
So, I was on the show shortly after
Warner Brothers announced that it had
signed a deal with Netflix. Paramount at
that point was saying to Warner Brothers
board, "We think you made a terrible
decision." And so, what they did was
they did something called a hostile bid,
which they went to Warner Brothers
shareholders and said, "Your board isn't
doing right by you. We're giving you a
better option."
And it became so loud and so frankly
compelling that the Warner Brothers
board was forced to open a dialogue with
Paramount. And they said to Netflix,
"We're going to talk with Paramount and
see what they can get. Anytime you You
come in and offer a higher bid if you
want, but we're going to talk to them.
And basically got to the point where the
Paramount deal was so good in Warner
Brothers' mind, they'd made enough
changes that they decided that
Paramount's deal was now the better
deal. They're like, "Not only did they
give us everything we wanted, but they
threw on a $7 billion fee that they
would pay if regulators blocked it." So,
they said, "All right, this is better
than Netflix. Netflix, Paramount's
better than you now. What do you want to
do?" And Netflix said, "Actually, we're
just going to walk away."
And now we're here.
And Lauren, how much did Paramount agree
to buy Warner Brothers for?
Paramount has agreed to buy Warner
Brothers for $31 a share. And just to
give a little bit of context, that is a
150%
premium to the share price of Warner
Brothers before any of the M&A talk,
which is nearly unheard of in deals.
And so, just to translate a little bit
here, I have read that what you just
described, Lauren, adds up to a total
purchase price of $111 billion. And a
lot of the coverage has basically made
it seem like that is
way too much to pay, that Paramount has
basically overspent on this asset.
Nicole, can you just explain that a
little bit? Like, why is that the
criticism?
Well, last spring the stock was worth $8
a share. And Paramount, when it made its
initial bid, offered $19 a share. And it
went up to 31. They also added a $2.8
billion
breakup fee to send to Netflix for
walking away from the deal.
>> Wow. So, that's a lot of money. The
combined company is going to be carrying
a debt load that's close to $80 billion,
which means they're going to have a lot
of debt on their books moving forward.
Yes, they will have 200 million
subscribers globally, so they will be in
a more effective place to compete
against the big streaming services, but
it still costs a lot of money to get
there. If we go back to 2019, which was
the time when Disney bought Fox for $71
billion
and flash forward to this acquisition.
Yes, Warner Brothers is bigger than Fox,
but this is 7 years later and the movie
business is not in a healthier state
than it was back then pre-COVID. Yeah, I
mean this is a business that is facing
serious structural challenges and
there's so much competition now for
eyeballs
even beyond streaming, just you know,
TikTok and social media and everyone's
attention is so fragmented. And yeah,
the box office numbers are are just
consistently down every year. So, just
you know, a couple years ago, even a
year ago, Warner Brothers Discovery
seemed like it was a sinking ship. I
mean, the head of the company, David
Zaslav, was kind of doing everything in
his power to cut costs to removing
movies from the platform, removing
episodes of Sesame Street from the
platform so he wouldn't have to pay
residuals. It was like
>> Really penny-pinching. Yes, it was a it
was a kind of a desperate situation
where he seemed to be basically throwing
everything overboard and um it's just a
staggering turnaround over the course of
this negotiation. I mean, hearing you
describe all of this, I'm wondering if
there's actually a way to think about
this is kind of like a huge coup for
Netflix because
it sounds like they essentially forced a
huge competitor to overpay for one asset
and as you said also walk away with a
$2.8 billion breakup fee. So, like they
got paid nearly $3 billion for not
winning this bidding war.
Yeah, they are certainly going to market
it like that. Uh particularly to their
investors who were very mad at them for
looking at the deal to begin with, you
know, they lost billions on their market
cap as part of these efforts. Not only
are they getting money from Paramount to
walk away, but they're walking away from
a company that's going to have about 80
billion in debt. Uh Jonathan just walked
through a lot of the challenges that
Warner Brothers was facing and a large
part of those was its debt load. When
you have a lot of debt, you have to pay
that debt. That makes the cost of doing
everything else much more expensive and
your margin for error is much more slim.
So, Netflix is surely going to tell the
market, "We made the smart deal in not
overpaying and leaving one of our
competitors at bruised or
that kind of in limbo in the process."
So, it sounds like what we have here is
Paramount buying a company that is
saddled with debt, paying top dollar,
potentially making Netflix look like
they are playing 4D chess pretty well,
actually. And all of this, I think,
[music] begs the question, "Why are the
Ellisons doing all of this?" And we're
going to get into that after the break.
I want to talk about the Ellisons for a
minute, just given how risky this deal
sounds.
Nicole, why do you think they are so
desperate for this deal?
Well, David Ellison was really
interested in buying Paramount. He
closed that deal 6 months ago. But what
he got in that acquisition was a company
that was also struggling, that had
started its own streaming service years
ago, that had its own share of debt,
that had its own
library of assets that were kind of
underutilized, that hadn't been
[clears throat] exploited as well as
they could have been. It was a company
that had changed hands over time and was
not in a very strong situation. It's got
close to 80 million subscribers
worldwide. They're not big enough to
compete with the big streamers. They're
still need more to really be a player in
this game. They look at HBO Max, which
has a subscriber base of 132 million
people worldwide, and they see a
opportunity to combine their forces, and
then now they will be a behemoth that
can actually fight in this battle for
subscribers. that is what every
entertainment company is desperate for
at this moment in time.
>> Right. But I would also say so there are
kind of two levels to this. One is you
know the one we're we're just talking
about here which is competing in the in
the kind of streaming entertainment
ecosystem space. But then I think you
can kind of go up a level and when you
ask the question of you know why why do
the Ellisons seem so so desperate to to
have this company making a deal that you
know that Netflix is happy to kind of
wash its hands of. And I think that
there's obviously like a bigger plan
here that the Ellisons have a bigger
plan and I think we're all still trying
to understand what the kind of political
ramifications of all of this is going to
be. How much of this is about Larry
Ellison wanting to put himself in a more
favorable position with the
administration to get more government
contracts which Oracle does a lot of.
And is that going to entail moving these
news outlets CBS and now CNN toward the
center to the right? And is that what is
going to be expected of David in order
to kind of keep his father's business
operations running as he would like them
to be in Washington? And that's
something that we're all kind of looking
at and waiting to see.
Right. And we've already seen some
evidence of how the politics could
affect the media business, right? Like
look what happened to CBS for example
after David Ellison acquired it last
year. We've already seen CBS make some
moves that have positioned them a little
bit further to the right. Yeah, that's
exactly right. I mean when David Ellison
took control of CBS he put Barry Weiss
in charge, you know the founder and
creator of Free Press and she
immediately started making changes to
the news network. She in a now kind of
somewhat famous infamous incident she
temporarily shelved a report that was
about to go on 60 Minutes about a
detention facility in El Salvador where
the Trump administration was sending
deportees. Of course the Stephen Colbert
show was terminated pretty quickly after
Ellison took over. So, you know, you
don't want to go too far with this, but
there's certainly been an effort and an
ongoing effort. We're seeing it now with
the Warner Iran too, where a lot of free
press contributors have been on the air
on CBS putting a a kind of a positive
spin on America's engagement in Iran.
So, you know, there has certainly been a
change at CBS and there is a lot of
anxiety that something similar is going
to come to CNN.
But just to point out, CNN is not the
same thing as CBS, right? How do you
think things might play out differently
at CNN?
Yeah, I mean, they are very different.
CNN has a very different identity than
CBS and CBS News does. CNN is a kind of
democratic [clears throat]
liberal network. This is a network that
first of all drives Trump crazy, but
also has really positioned itself
against Donald Trump much more overtly
than CBS News ever did. So, when you
think about how David Ellison might try
to pivot at CNN, it would both be more
challenging because the business model
is really built around a democratic
audience. I mean, that is the
viewership, but also it would be a lot
more seismic if it actually happened.
So, that of course is the news business
side of this deal, but the news business
side is not the only side of this deal.
A lot of the reaction to this is coming
from Hollywood. Nicole, talk to us about
what you are hearing from your sources
there about what they are anticipating,
concerned about, or maybe even happy
about.
You know, it's interesting. When Netflix
won the deal in a big surprise back in
December, people were appalled and
scared and thought, "Okay, here comes
the big bad tech giant who's going to
come in and just flatten the theatrical
movie business because they never
believed in it." But over the months,
Ted Sarandos and Greg Peters, the
co-CEOs, did everything right. They went
to Warner Brothers, met with top
leadership. They gave significant
interviews, one of which was to us, and
they talked really in detail about how
they were going to move forward. And
what they were saying were all the
things that people wanted to hear. Oh,
no, we don't hate the movie business. We
love the movie business. We're going to
put all of Warner Brothers movies in
theaters. We're going to put movies in
theaters for 45 days, which is a lot of
days nowadays. People must have been
thrilled. People were thrilled. Oh, we
have a television business that licenses
content to other studios. Great, we're
going to keep that as is. Oh, HBO? We
love HBO. We always wanted to be HBO.
We're of course going to keep HBO
intact. On the flip side, now we have
Paramount has acquired the studio, and
no one's really clear who's going to
survive and who's not going to survive.
>> [snorts]
>> To your point, Nicole, I mentioned the
debt earlier, and the only way to make
the debt work is to cut costs. They
expect to get around 6 billion in
synergies from this deal. Synergies is
corporate speak for cost cutting. It
often means layoffs.
Paramount has said these synergies will
come predominantly not from layoffs, but
if you've covered enough deals, uh and
I've covered several,
usually some of the easiest way that you
can get cost cutting in a merger it is
through layoffs. So, that is something
that I know the bankers that I talk to
certainly say that I should be, you
know, keeping an eye out for.
What does all of this mean though for
us, the consumers, the people that like
watching TV and movies? Like how might
we feel some of these changes, Nicole?
Well, it's still unclear how this is
going to all play out and how we as
consumers will see
movies and television from Paramount
Warner Brothers going forward. Yes,
there are two separate streaming
entities right now. We have Paramount
Plus and we have HBO Max.
One would assume that these are going to
merge together. We don't know if they're
going to be called HBO Max or called
Paramount Plus, but at some point in
time they will merge these two streaming
services together into one and we will
probably have one app that we can all
access all this content on. As for the
movie studio, that too is unclear. We do
know they have told us that they're
going to be making 30 movies a year at
least that they are putting in theaters.
David Ellison is a big believer in the
theatrical release. He made a point of
it on his investor call yesterday saying
that movies that debut in theaters first
have a much greater impact culturally
than movies that debut in streaming
first. As for how his taste goes, we
don't yet know what the makeup of those
30 movies will be. In the past, he has
been a big fan of Transformers and
Mission Impossible and Top Gun. Those
were the movies he invested in when he
was at Skydance. What his slate looks
like moving forward is still a work in
progress.
Well, just aside from the question of
what kinds of movies David Ellison might
like, I think there's also a question of
how much politics could affect content
choices. And I would be remiss here if I
did not point out, Nicole, that you and
I went to go see the Melania movie
together with our dads. Obviously, a
different studio, that was Amazon, but
that very much felt like an example of
how somebody in charge of a movie studio
might make something to make the
president and the administration happy.
Yes, we did see it and we survived. Our
dads, maybe not as well.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
on a side note, however, when it comes
to what's going to happen going forward,
yes, we saw David Ellison cozy up to the
president to make this deal happen. We
saw him at the State of the Union. We
saw him taking selfies with Lindsey
Graham. We've seen all these things
happen. We don't know yet how that's
going to impact the studio. What may in
fact be the bigger issue is that this is
a studio that has a lot of debt on its
books and has to make safe decisions
because they don't want to take big
risks. And so while in Hollywood there
is no such thing as a sure thing, it is
maybe safer to make movies that are
based on well-known franchises that have
built-in audiences than to do the kind
of things that Warner Brothers has done
in the past year that has won it lots of
accolades and could make them the big
winners at the Oscars in two weeks with
movies like sinners and one battle after
another which are driven by auteurs.
We don't know if that's the strategy
they're going to make simply because it
may be too risky to make those kinds of
films. So it might be less about
political kowtowing and more just about
making the kind of movies that are
really just sure bets. Sure bets, down
the middle, attracts a big audience,
brings in a whole bunch of people.
It's all going to be
execution-dependent. That's how the
movie business is. There's no sure
things.
Many years ago, I actually covered the
entertainment business. I was a reporter
at Variety magazine and I had a source
who liked to say that every few years a
new rich person would come to Hollywood.
They'd want access to the parties and
the celebrities, etc.
And each time the person would say, "I
know how to finance movies better than
the last guy."
And the only thing that ever changed was
the accent of the person saying it.
But the arrival of the Ellisons in
Hollywood feels really different in part
because the Ellisons' motivations and
what they potentially have to gain feels
so different. So Jonathan, can you just
talk a little bit about what it could
mean for one family to have so much
power like what they are poised to have
if this deal goes through?
Yes, this moment does seem different and
I think that you really have to see this
in a kind of bigger context. You know,
we're focusing a lot on David Ellison
with good reason. I mean, he's the
principal actor behind this, but the
principal backer of all this financially
is his father. And I think you have to
see the Hollywood piece of this and the
acquisitions versus Paramount and now
Warner Brothers Discovery at the very
least dovetailing with what Larry
Ellison is up to at Oracle in terms of
building out this AI infrastructure and
in terms of getting involved with
TikTok. They now own 15% of TikTok and
may very well be in charge of handling
all the American data that comes out of
TikTok. This is part of Larry Ellison's
desire to have access to data in the
form of film, news, social media,
anything that he can use to train AI
models and to build out this new AI
infrastructure that he's in the process
of building. And so I think that you
almost have to see this through two very
different lenses. One is as again an
example of the kind of ongoing
consolidation of the media and of
Hollywood, but there's a whole other
lens through which you need to see this
and that is the lens of the creation of
a very new and different kind of global
media empire.
One that's being born in an era where
there's companies out [music] there, you
know, kind of Google, Amazon and a
handful of others who are gradually
amassing control of everything. That's
the game [music] that Larry Ellison is
playing in. That's the field that he's
competing on and you have to see
David Ellison's moves in Hollywood and
in the media as part of that bigger
game. [music]
I mean, you know, when the Murdochs were
amassing their power, there was, you
know, a lot of hand-wringing for years
about how much power the Murdochs had,
how much political influence that power
gave them and how much how much ability
across [music] continents to shape the
political landscapes of entire
countries. What we're heading into now
is the rise of a new family, instead of
Rupert and Lachlan, it's Larry and David
and they are amassing a media empire for
the data-driven digital age.
>> [music]
>> Nicole, Lauren, anything else to add?
Well, I just wonder if HBO will make a
sequel to Succession and feature the
Ellison [clears throat] family, or if
that's verboten now.
>> [snorts]
>> Someone else is going to have to make
that one. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> Maybe Netflix.
>> Netflix. Yeah, maybe Netflix. There you
go. The last man standing who can make a
Succession property.
>> [music]
>> Lauren, Jonathan, Nicole, thank you so
much for being with us. Thank you. My
pleasure.
Thanks for having us.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
>> [music]
>> On the fourth day of the US-Israeli
assault on Iran, the Trump
administration urged tens of thousands
of Americans to immediately leave from
14 Middle Eastern countries, [music]
including Israel, Saudi Arabia, and the
United Arab Emirates,
>> [music]
>> citing safety risks.
But Americans in those countries
complained that US officials were doing
little to assist them in evacuating.
Several US embassies, which would
normally organize evacuations, shut down
their operations or came under attack.
The US consulate complex in Dubai
[music]
and the US embassy in the capital of
Saudi Arabia were both struck by Iranian
drones. It's a little bit disheartening
and a little bit envious to hear that
the UK government is actually arranging
transport for the British citizens to be
able to extract them, whereas here for
us as Americans, we feel abandoned. In
an interview with CNN,
>> [music]
>> a retired American general in the UAE
said that many Americans felt stranded.
Speaking from the White House, President
Trump said that many of his preferred
candidates to lead Iran after the
killing [music] of its supreme leader
have already been killed in the
conflict. Well, most of the people we
had in mind are dead. So, you know, we
had some in mind from that group that is
>> [music]
>> is dead.
And now we have another group. They may
be dead also.
>> [music]
>> Based on reports.
So, I guess you have a third way.
Meanwhile, in Iran, thousands [music]
gathered to mourn the victims of an
airstrike on a girls' elementary school
over the weekend.
>> [music]
>> The bombing killed at least 175 people,
many of them students. [music]
As of Tuesday afternoon, according to
government officials and rights groups,
the death toll from the conflict had
risen to nearly [music] 800 people in
Iran,
31 in Lebanon, 10 in Israel, and six
[music] in various Gulf states.
In addition, six US service members
>> [music]
>> have been killed.
And
in the closely watched Texas Senate
Democratic [music] primary, voters chose
James Talarico, who emphasized healing
political rifts over Jasmine Crockett, a
firebrand who's railed against President
Trump.
A Democrat hasn't won a statewide race
[music] in Texas in more than 30 years,
but Talarico is confident that he would
take back the state.
But Talarico's opponent, Representative
Jasmine Crockett, had not immediately
[music]
conceded as of early Wednesday, and a
last-minute legal fight over Dallas
County's voting procedures complicates
[music] matters.
Crockett told supporters at her election
night party on Tuesday that people had,
quote, been [music] disenfranchised in
Dallas County.
Today's episode was produced by [music]
Rob Zippco, Alex Stern, and Auste
Charturvedi.
It was edited by Brendan [music]
Klinkenberg and contains music by Rowan
Nemiasto and Marion Lozano. Our theme
music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.